# E1SER-1617 Solved

## Group I
### 1) 
#### Q: 
The nodes of a wireless sensor network are usually composed of simple processors and have low resources. 
Explain what are the main reasons for this.
#### A: 
- WSN nodes dont need to compute complex functions, therefore a simple processor is enough.
- Since it is an embbed system used widely on rescue/emergency situations, it is important to reduce energy so it is always ready and aso cost to help mantain the system, thus its important to have a low memory, which is also a reason to have a simple processor using only one stack.

### 2)
#### Q: 
In wireless sensor networks communications sometimes “aggregation” is used. Explain what it is,
why is it possible, and the importance of using it.
#### A:
Data aggregation is a method to conserve energy by eliminating the redundant data transmission in dense WSNs. Instead of sending the dat throughout the whole network, it is sent only to a small group of nodes that exist closely, that can compute simple operations like mean, max and min from the measured values. Reducind the number of sent packets/bits.


## Group II

### 1) 

#### Q: 
Doing some pre-processing in a node of the network instead of transmitting all raw data may contribute to reduce energy consumption. Explain why.

#### A: 
- When transmitting raw data, it can happen that multiple nodes will have to filter the same thing, by having a pre-processing, this job is already done by only one node, reducing energy.
- In cases where what is important is an overview of the data, like mean, max and min, what matter is only one value, so transmitting all the raw data is a non-sense. So, this way it reduces packet transmissions.

### 2)

#### Q: 
Although clock synchronization may introduce some overhead in WSN communications, it can nevertheless contribute to power savings. Explain why and give some examples.

#### A: 
- Clock synchronization is essential for several aspects regarding a WSN: to know when an event occured on the physical world, for data fusion, localization, calibration, and even protocols like MAC or others relating to cryptography.
- However, it has some downsides, for example, there may be no links between nodes, and when there is, it's hard to estimate the transmission delay. Also, the energy is very limited and the nodes need to be cheap, so no expensive clock circuitry.
- By doing clock syncronization, its possible to improve the power savings, since there will be no need for retransmission, asyncronous calls or unnecessary wake time.
- Some examples of clock sync are Radio Scheduling: TDMA (Time Division Multiple Access) and Guard band, and Array Processing.
- Time Division Multiple Access (TDMA) consiste em varios nós trocarem informação usando a mesma frequência. O tempo é dividido em frames e cada nó tem um frame associado. Assim é possivel que quem vai receber informação tenha o receptor ligado apenas durante aquele frame específico, poupando energia.


## Group III
### 1) a)
#### Q: 
What is the stimulus and the output signal?
#### A: 
Stimulus: Temperature, Output signal: Current
### 1) b) i)
#### Q: 
SPAN or full scale input
#### A: 
```
FSI = 150-(-55) = 205 ºC
```

### 1) b) ii)
#### Q: 
Full scale output
#### A:
``` 
298.2 = 25*1+b => b = 273.2 ºC
f(150) = 150*1+273.2 = 423.2 uA
f(-55) = -55*1+273.2 = 218.2 uA
FSO = 423.2 - 218.2 = 20 uA
```

### 1) b) iii)
#### Q: 
Sensitivity
#### A: 
Same as Nominal Temperature Coefficient, 1 uA/K

### 1) b) iv)
#### Q: 
Linearity error
#### A: 
```
+/- 1.5 ºC
```

### 1) c)
#### Q: 
Write the equation of the transfer function.
#### A: 
```
f(T) = 1*T + 273.2 
```

### 2) 
#### Q: 
Explain the difference between a transducer and an actuator. Indicate four different types of actuators.
#### A: 
Transducer converts one type of energy into the same or a different one. An actuato is a transducer that converts a signal into an action.
Mechanical, Radiation, Magnetic, Chemical, Electric, Thermal.

### 3)
#### Q: 
Wheatstone bridges are used, as conditioning electronics, with sensor.Explain what for and how they are used.
#### A:
- A Wheatstone bridge is an electrical circuit used to measure an unknown electrical resistance by balancing two legs of a bridge circuit, one leg of which includes the unknown component. 
- This component is the sensor element. 
- At the point of balance, R2/R1 = Rx/R3.
- Can be used for example, to calculate light intensity, pressure or strain.

### 4)
#### Q:
Figure presents an encoder. Explain how it works.
#### A: 
- An encoder converts angular rotation/velocity into an analog or digital signal. With the led emmiting light, the disk rotates and the photodectotor receives the light, determining how much the disk was rotated. Each arc in the rotation indicates a different position and has a different pattern of open/closed holes.
- There are 2 main categories, optical and magnetic.
- Magnetic enconder work the same way, a large magnetized disk spins over a plate of magneto-resistive sensors, causing a predictable responses in the sensor according to the arc.


## Group IV

### 1) 
Consider the CAN bus MAC protocol, CSMA/CR.
### 1) a)
#### Q: 
Explain succinctly how the it can support differentiated message priorities.
#### A: 
If two nodes try to transmit at the same time, only one message is sent to the bus (neither of them is destroyed). The 		priority system works based on a unique identifier, in which a lower identifier means that the priority is higher. If a recessive bit is being sent, and a dominant is monitored, it stops.
On other protocols,
CSMA/CA - o nó envia uma mensagem a avisar que quer enviar um pacote. se ninguem estiver a usar a rede o pacote é enviado e outros nós que queiram enviar pacotes a seguir enviam também mensagens de aviso para se poderem apoderar do bus quando o primeiro terminar.
CSMA/CD - escuta a rede, quando não ouvir nada, envia o pacote. se dois nós enviarem ao mesmo tempo ocorre uma colisão (power spike) escutado por todos os nós e os pacotes são destruidos.

### 1) b) 
#### Q:
CAN is a cabled network technology. How could CSMA/CR be implemented in a wireless network?
#### A:
?
### 2)
Answer the following questions regarding Wireless Sensor Network MAC protocols.
### 2) a)
#### Q:
Explain the "exposed terminal problem” associated with carrier-sense based MAC protocols.
#### A:
In wireless networks, the exposed terminal problem occurs when a node is prevented from sending packets to other nodes because of a neighbouring transmitter. Consider an example of 4 nodes labelled R1, S1, S2, and R2, where the two receivers (R1, R2) are out of range of	each other, yet the two transmitters (S1, S2) in the middle are in range of each other. Here, if a
transmission between S1 and R1 is taking place, node S2 is prevented from transmitting to R2 as it concludes after carrier sense that it will interfere with the transmission by its neighbour S1. However,	note that R2 could still receive the transmission of S2 without interference because it is out of range of S1.
### 2) b)
#### Q:	
Provide three advantages and three disadvantages of Scheduled MAC protocols, in comparison with contention-based MAC protocol.
#### A:
Adv: No colisions, well defined sleep times, no overheading (receiveing a packet destined for another node) and low idle listening (trying to receive when nobody is sending)
Disadv: Nees synchronization and signaling to establish the schedule, clocks can drift, scalability problems, hard to adapt to changes.	

## Group V

### 1)
#### Q:
The Contiki operating system allows in its execution model the use of “protothreads”. Briefly explain what are the main characteristics and limitations of that mechanism.
#### A:
Protothreads are a design point between events and threads.
Characteristics: uses only one stack, thus have low memory usage; has a sequential flow of control just like threads.
Limitations: May not use local variables, because as they use a single stack, the stack context is not saved across a blocking call.

### 2)
Consider the following program written to the TinyOS operating system
### 2) a)
#### Q: 
Explain how it works taking into account the sequence of actions since the begin.
#### A:
- There are 2 files, one describing the configuration (left) and another describing the module.
- On the configuration, the interface's components are created and associated with the module.
- On the module, the used interfaces are declares and the flow of the program is defined.
- Initially .booted() is ran, calling the timer that counts 1 second periodically. When .fired() is triggered, it calls .read(), that reads the sendor and when its done titrggers readDOne() that calls the leds or not according to the data address.

### 2) b)
#### Q: Sketch how an equivalent operation is usually done in a more generic operating system.
#### A:
```
while(1) {
  [data, err] = sensorRead();
  if(!err) {
    if(sensorRead() > 0x0200)
      led0On();
    else
      led0Off();
    }
  sleep(1);
}
```
### 3)
#### Q: 
Consider the following program written to the FreeRTOS operating system (configured with preemption). Explain how it works and list the first 20 items of the sequence of instructions (numbered lines) after the start of the scheduler.
#### A: 
A1 A2 A3 A4 B1 B2 B3 B4 A5 A1 A2 A3 A4 B1 B2 B3 B4 A5 ...
