# E2SER-1617

## Group I
### 1) 
#### Q: The nodes of a sensor network are usually based on microcontrollers. Explain what is the difference between a microcontroller and a
microprocessor, and its importance on the building of a sensor node.
#### A: 
A microcontroller contains a mircroprocessor responsible for all the computation and execution of commands, and also the necessary peripherals to comunicate with the exterior and external memory, which is of most importance to a sensor node.

### 2)
#### Q: In wireless sensor networks it is common to have a multi-hop architecture. In addition to this, sometimes, we have what is usually called “opportunistic networks”. Explain this concept and its importance.
#### A: 
A multi-hop architecture is when messages are not sent directly, but through several nodes, allowing longer paths to be reached.
Opportunistic networks are a type of multi-hop networks, where each node keeps a dynamic map of the routes, in order to send the message through the shortest path. If there are no nodes currently to send to, it waits till an oportunity arises.

## Group II
### 1)
#### Q: Dynamic Voltage and Frequency Scaling (DVFS) can be used for power saving. Explain how it works.
#### A: 
DVFS is used for cases where dynamic power is dominant. It works by adjusting the power and the frequency in the processor, controllers and peripherals of a device, so that the power is optimized where circunstances allow it to be.

### 2)
#### Q: Most microcontrollers have several different power consumption modes (e.g. run, idle, sleep). Briefly explain how is this obtained and what are the main concerns when using these modes.
#### A:
These modes can be obtained by turning off certain parts of the microcontroller that are not needed in the designated state, or by reducing the clock frequency. When switching states, the system can prove to be unresponsive and spend energy, which may or may not be worth according to the state duration and occurancy.

## Group III
### 1)
#### Q: The characteristics of a hydrogel-based pH sensor is given in table. What is the stimulus and the output signal? Indicate, justifying, the values for: SPAN, FSO, sensitivity in the linear region and non-
linearity error.
#### A:
- Stimulus is pH, and output signal is voltage.
- SPAN = 9-2 = 7 pH
- FSO = 0.8-0.075 = 0.725 mV
- Sensitivity
```
m = (0.41-0.1)/(7.5-4) = 0.089 mV/pH
0.2 = 0.089*5 + b => b = -0.245 mV
```
- Non-linearity
```
The transfer function is f(pH) = 0.088*pH + 0.07.
y = 3.5*0.089 - 0.245 = 0.0665 -> 0.8 - 0.0665 = -0.7335 mV
```

### 2)
#### Q: Figure presents a diagram of a two-phase permanent magnet stepper motor. Describe how a stepper motor works and illustrate with the stepper motor of the figure. What is the step angle?
#### A: 
A step motor contains a certain number of opposite pair bobines (number of phases), and a certain amount of poles on the center of the motor connected to an iman. As current passes by the pairs BB' and stops passing on AA', each section will be attracted or repulsed. If B turns green, it will spin anti-clockwise. The step angle is the angle made at each step, at each magnetization.
```
angle = 360/(2*N_poles*N_phases)
N_poles = 1
N_phases = 2
angle = 90 º
```

### 3)
#### Q: What is the difference between piezoresistive and piezoelectric transduction mechanisms? Give one example of a piezoresistive sensor and one of a piezoelectric sensor.
#### A: 
A piezoresistive transducer deals with resistivity or geometric changes due to an applied force. For example, a force sensor.
A piezoelectric converts mechanical fields into charge (voltage). For example, an ultrasonic sensor.

### 4)
#### Q: What is the stimulus and the output signal of a thermocouple? Explain how a thermocouple works.
#### A:
Stimulus is the temperature and the output signal is electrical.
It consists of 2 different metals joined together at different temperatures. One known and one unknown. By measuring the ouput voltage, it allows the determination of the temperature.

## Group IV
### 1) a)
#### Q: The CAN protocol includes a bit stuffing mechanism, whereby complementary bit inserted upon detection of five identical consecutive bits. Explain the purpose of the bit stuffing mechanism.
#### A:
Bit stuffing is useful to garantee a constant bit rate on the CAN bus since all the node's clocks are synchronized. By sending it after the 5th identical consecutive bit, it allows identification of that additional bit. It is also used for other purposes, such as error detection and avoiding excessive DC.

### 1) b)
#### Q: When a station detects an error, it broadcasts an error flag comprising six identical bits. Explain the purpose of this mechanism and the reasoning behind its implementation.
#### A:
Six identical consecutive bits can never exist because of bit stuffing, when everything is error free. This six bits correspond to the overload flag on the error frame. When sent the overload flag destroys the fixed form of the frame fields, and the other nodes detect this condition, trasmiting and overload flag as well but not processing it.

### 2) 
Consider a Bluetooth piconet, comprising one master and two slave devices (S1 and S2). The master device has the following ACL packets in its transmission queue, which are ordered as follows (format is <destination, packet>): <S2, DM1>, <S1, DH5>, <S2, DM3>. Regarding the
ACL uplink traffic: S1 has two packets in the queue: DH3 and DM1; S2 has a single DH1 packet in the queue.
### 2) a) 
#### Q: Draw the timeline diagram of packet transmissions, clearly indicating the timeslot
assignment (for each packet, indicate the type, the occupied slots, the sender and the
receiver). The diagram ends when the last ACL packet is transmitted.
#### A:


### 2) a)
#### Q: Explain the difference between the SCO and ACL links, distinguishing the traffic types (and
respective burstiness) that each is able to support more efficiently.
#### A: 
<a href=""></a>

### 2) b)
#### Q: Explain the difference between the SCO and ACL links, distinguishing the traffic types (and respective burstiness) that each is able to support more efficiently.
#### A:
SCO (Synchronous Connection Oriented) is mainly used for Voice Communication. Does no retransmissions. HV1,HV2,HV3 are different types of voice packets possible, with different encoding schemes that it supports.
ACL is for everything else, being the main protocol used for data transmission. 

## Group V
### 1) 
#### Q: When programming an embedded system, it is not always available an operating system. Briefly explain how, in such situation, should be addressed several activities and latency requirements.
#### A: In this type of systems, an event-handling approach is taken. The program is idle and when an event occurs, the handler is called and executes the code, in preference fastly.

### 2) 
#### Q: When using the TinyOS operating system, the code of an application program can be in: “command handlers”; “event handlers”; or “tasks”. Briefly explain their main characteristics, and the situations
where they are used.
#### A: 
A component uses interfaces, and these interfaces contain events and commands. It is of the user's responsability to create the handlers for them. Tasks are for cases where the execution can run later, rather than now and in th background. Tasks can be preempted by events, and so can commands. However, events can't be preempted.

### 3) 
Consider the following program written to the FreeRTOS operating system (configured with preemption).
### 3) a)
#### Q: Explain how it works.
#### A: 
3 tasks and 1 queue of size 3 is created. Two of them run the same code but with different arguments. The other runs vTaskB. The priority order is Task1, Task2 and Task3. The code implemented is a simple sender/receiver, where there are 2 clients and 1 server. 1000 is the stack size of each task.

### 3) b)
#### Q: List the values processed by function “vProcVal” during the first 5 seconds after initialization.
#### A: 
```
1  - 51
2  - 11
3  - 52
4  - 12
5  - 53
...
20
```
